Part – A
1. 
The total value credited to a project at any point is known as the Earned Value (EV) or
Budgeted Cost of Work Performed (BCWP). EV may be measured in terms of monetary values,
person-hours or workdays.
Earned Value = % of completed work x BAC (Budget at Completion).
2.
Function points are a measure of the functional size provided to the user by an application.
The user is any entity (either a human or another application), outside of the application being
measured, that considers the function to be important
3.
Contract management is the process of managing contract creation, execution and analysis
to maximize operational and financial performance at an organization, all while reducing
financial risk. Organizations encounter an ever-increasing amount of pressure to reduce costs
and improve company performance.
4. 
A series of checkpoints in the initial activity plan need to be set are called setting checkpoints.
Checkpoints maybe regular (Daily, for example) or tied to specific events such as the
production of a report or other deliverable
5.
The Configuration Librarian is the custodian and guardian of all master copies of software and
documentation CIs registered with Configuration Management. The major tasks of this role
are to number, record, store and distribute Configuration Management issues.
6.
• Size of the project
• Degree of risk of the project
7.
A tool for determining the size of a purchased package by counting all the functions included.
• Provides assistance to users in determination of benefits of a package for their
organization, by counting the functions that specifically match their requirements.
When assessing the cost of the package, the size of the functions that will be
effectively used, the productivity and cost of the staff is possible to perform a “make
or buy” analysis.
• Supports the analysis of productivity and quality, either directly or in conjunction with
other metrics such as effort, cost and defects. But if the development method of the
organization is chaotic (each project is developed in a different way), even if the
function points counting of the project and the effort record have been made correctly,
the analysis of productivity among the projects would have been impaired.
• Supports the project scope management. A challenge of any project manager is to
control “scope creep”, or the increase of the scope. To make estimates and
measurements of function points of the project at every stage of its life cycle is
possible to determine whether the functional requirements increased or decreased,
and whether this variation corresponds to new requirements or requirements that
already exist and were just more detailed.
8.
• Gantt charts
• Timeline charts
9.
Bespoke refers to custom services or products. Bespoke software is a software customized
for a specific purpose. It is used in the computer industry is in reference to websites. Bespoke
programs may include custom accounting software for a certain company or a network
monitoring tool for a specific network
10.
Advantages:
• Known customer expenditure
• Supplier motivation
Disadvantages:
• Higher prices to allow for contingency
• Difficulties in modifying requirements
• Upward pressure on the cost of changes
• Threat to system quality
11.
• Critical path activities
• Activities with no free float – if delayed later dependent activities are delayed
• Activities with less than a specified float
• High risk activities
• Activities using critical resources
12.
• Earned value analysis is based on assigning a value to each task or work
package based on the original expenditure forecasts.
• The assigned value is the original budgeted cost for the item and is known as
the planned value (PV) or budgeted cost of work scheduled (BCWS)
• The total value credited to a project at any point is known as the earned
value (EV)or budgeted cost of work performed (BCWP)
13.
A slip chart is a very alternative favoured by some project managers who believe it provides
a more striking visual indication of those activities that are not progressing to schedule-the
more the slip line bends, the greater variation from the plan. Additional slip lines are added
at intervals and, as they built up, the project manager will gain an idea to whether the project
is improving or not. A very jagged line indicates a need for rescheduling.
14.
This is associated with function point (FP) counting. The size of the system to be delivered is
calculated or estimated at the outset of the project. The size could be estimated in lines of
code, but FPs can be more easily derived from requirements documents.
15.
Scope creep (also called requirement creep, or kitchen sink syndrome) in project
management refers to changes, continuous or uncontrolled growth in a project's scope, at 
any point after the project begins. This can occur when the scope of a project is not properly
defined, documented, or controlled.
16.
Proposals are evaluated based on
• Clarity of the Proposal
• Scientific significance of the proposal objectives
• Sound research methodology
• Applicability
• Budget estimation
17.
Requirement analysis
• External consultant can draw up a requirements document.
• Check requirements reflects their needs.
• Functional requirements, quality requirements
Evaluation plan
• Check mandatory requirement
• Consider desirable requirement
• Calculate the cost for the whole life time of the proposed system
• Increase in quality-increase in cost
Invitation to tender
• It contains the requirement document with supporting letter which specifies how to
prepare the response
• Deadline specified
• Evaluation of proposal
• Scrutiny of the proposal document
• Interviewing supplier’s representatives
• Demonstration
• Site visit
• Practical test
18.
Change control is a systematic approach to managing all changes made to a product or system.
The purpose is to ensure that no unnecessary changes are made, that all changes are
documented, that services are not unnecessarily disrupted and that resources are used
efficiently.
19.
Outsourcing is a practice in which an individual or company performs tasks, provides services
or manufactures products for another company functions that could have been or is usually
done in-house. Outsourcing is typically used by companies to save costs.
20.
• One of the simplest and oldest techniques for tracking project progress. An
activity bar chart indicating scheduled activity dates and durations. Reported
progress is recorded on the chart by shading activity bars. Today cursor
provides visual indication of which activities are ahead or behind schedule.
• Disadvantage: do not show clearly the slippage of the project completion date
through the life of the project
PART B
1.
Creating the Framework
Exercising control over a project and ensuring that targets are met is a matter of regular
monitoring, finding out what is happening, and comparing it with current targets. If there is a
mismatch between the planned outcomes and the actual one, then either preplanning is
needed to bring the project back on target or the target will have to be revised. A model of
the project control cycle is illustrated in the above diagram.
Responsibility
The overall responsibility for ensuring adequate progress on a project is often the role of the
project-steering committee or Project Board. Day-to-day responsibility will be with the 
project manager and, in all but the smallest of projects; aspects of this can be delegated to
team leaders.
The above diagram illustrates the typical reporting structure found with medium and large
projects. With small projects employing less number of staff individual team members usually
report directly to the project manager. But in most cases team leaders will collate reports on
their section‘s progress and forward summaries to the project manager. These, in turn, will
be incorporated into project-level reports for the steering committee and, via them or directly,
progress reports for the client. Reporting may be oral or written, formal or informal, or regular
or ad hoc. Some examples of each type are tabulated.
Assessing the Progress
• Progress assessment will be made on the basis of information collected and collated
at regular intervals or when specific events occur.
• Wherever possible, this information will be objective and tangible - whether or not a
particular report has been delivered.
• Progress assessment will have to rely on the judgment of the team members who are
carrying out the project activities.
Setting Checkpoints
A series of checkpoints in the initial activity plan need to be set. Checkpoints maybe
• Regular (Daily, for example)
• Tied to specific events such as the production of a report or other deliverable
Taking Snapshots
• The frequency with which a manager needs to receive information about progress will
depend upon the size and degree of risk of the project or that part of the project under
their control.
• Team leaders, for example, need to assess progress daily whereas project managers
may find weekly or monthly reporting appropriate.
In general, the higher the level, the less frequent and less detailed the reporting needs to be.
A formal weekly collection of information from staff carrying out activities is favoured.
2.
Visualizing Progress
Once data has been collected about project progress, a manager needs some way of
presenting that data to greatest effect. Some of these methods such as Gantt charts provide
a static picture, a single snapshot, whereas others such as time line charts try to show how
the project has progressed and changed over time.
The Gantt Chart
Gantt chart is a technique used for tracking project progress. This is essentially an activity bar
chart indicating scheduled activity dates and durations frequently augmented with activity
floats. Reported progress is recorded on the chart by shading activity bars and a today cursor
provides an immediate visual indication of which activities are ahead or behind schedule. The
diagram shows an example of Gantt chart as at the end of Tuesday of week 17.
Code and test module D has been completed ahead of schedule and Code and test module A
appears also to be ahead of schedule. The coding and testing of the other two modules are
behind schedule.
The Slip Chart
A slip chart illustrated in the diagram below is an alternative favored by some project
managers who believe it provides a more striking visual indication of those activities that are
not progressing to schedule. The more the slip line bends, the greater the variation from the
plan. Additional slip lines are added at intervals and, as they build up, the project manager
will gain an idea as to whether the project is improving subsequent slip lines bend less or not.
A very jagged slip line indicates a need for rescheduling.
Ball Charts
A more prominent way of showing whether or not targets have been met is to use a ball chart.
The same is illustrated in the diagram given below. In this version of the ball chart, the circles
indicate start and completion points for activities. The circles initially contain the original
scheduled dates. Whenever revisions are produced, these are added as second dates in the
appropriate circle until an activity is actually started or completed, when the relevant date
replaces the revised estimate.
Circles will contain only two dates, the original and most recent target dates, or the original
and actual dates. Where the actual start or finish date for an activity is later than the target
date, the circle is colored red (dark grey) - where an actual date is on time or earlier than the
target then the circle is colored green (light grey). Such charts are frequently placed in a
prominent position and the color coded balls provide a constant reminder to the project team.
Where more than one team is working in close proximity, such a highly visible record of
achievement can encourage competitiveness between teams. Another advantage of ball
charts over Gantt and slip charts is that they are relatively easy to keep up to date. Only the
dates and possibly colors need to be changed, whereas the others need to be redrawn each
time target dates are revised.
The Timeline
One major disadvantage of Gantt chart, Slip chart and Ball chart is that they do not slow clearly
the slippage of the project completion date through the life of the project. Knowing the
current state of a project helps in revising plans to bring it back on target, but analyzing and
understanding trends helpsto avoid slippage in future projects. The timeline chart is a method
of recording and displaying the way in which targets have changed throughout the duration 
of the project. Diagram illustrates a timeline chart for a project at the end of the sixth week.
Planned time is plotted along the horizontal axis and elapsed time down the vertical axis. The
lines meandering down the chart represent scheduled activity completion date. During the
start of the project analyze existing system is scheduled to be completed by the Tuesday of
week 3, obtain user requirements by Thursday of week 5, issue tender, the final activity, by
Tuesday of week 9, and so on.
At the end of the first week the project manager reviews these target dates and leaves them
as they are - lines are therefore drawn vertically downwards from the target dates to the
end of week one on the actual time axis. At the end of week 2, the project manager decides
that obtain user requirements will not be completed until Tuesday of week 6. So the project
manager therefore extends that activity line diagonally to reflect this. The other activity
completion targets are also delayed correspondingly. By the Tuesday of week 3, analyze
existing system is completed and the project manager puts a blob on the diagonal timeline
to indicate that this has happened. At the end of week 3 the project manager decides to
keep to the existing targets. At the end of week 4 the project manager adds another three
days to draft tender and issue tender.
3.
Throughout development, software consists of a collection of items (such as programs, data
and documents) that can easily be changed. During software development, the design, code,
and even requirements are often changed, and the changes occur at any time during the
development. This easily changeable nature of software and the fact that changes often take
place require that changes be done in a controlled manner. Software configuration
management (SCM) is the discipline for systematically controlling the changes that take place
during development. Software configuration management is a process independent of the
development process largely because most development models cannot accommodate
change at any time during development. SCM can be considered as having four major
components:
• Software configuration identification
• Change control
• Status accounting and auditing
• Authentication
Configuration identification:
The first requirement for any change management is to have clearly agreed on basis for
change. That is, when a change is done, it should be clear to what changes has been applied.
This requires baselines to be established. A baseline change is the changing of the established
baseline, which is controlled by SCM. After baseline changes the state of the software is
defined by the most recent baseline and the changes that were made. Some of the common
baselines are functional or requirements baseline, design baseline, and product or system
baseline. Functional or requirement baseline is generally the requirements document that
specifies the functional requirements for the software. Design baseline consists of the
different components in the software and their designs. Product or system baseline
represents the developed system. It should be clear that a baseline is established only after
the product is relatively stable. Though the goal of SCM is to control the establishment and
changes to these baselines, treating each baseline as a single unit for the purpose of change
is undesirable, as the change may be limited to a very small portion of the baseline.
Change control:
Most of the decisions regarding the change are generally taken by the configuration control
board (CCB), which is a group of people responsible for configuration management, headed
by the configuration manager. For smaller projects, the CCB might consist of just one person.
A change is initiated by a change request. The reason for change can be anything. However,
the most common reasons are requirement changes, changes due to bugs, platform changes,
and enhancement changes. The CR for change generally consists of three parts. The first part
describes the change, reason for change, the SCIs that are affected, the priority of the change,
etc. The second part, filled by the CM, describes the decision taken by the CCB on this CR, the 
action the CM feels need to be done to implement this change and any other comments the
CM may have. The third part is filled by the implementer, which later implements the change.
Status accounting and auditing:
For status accounting, the main source of information is the CRs and FRs themselves.
Generally, a field in the CR/FR is added that specifies its current status. The status could be
active, complete, or not scheduled. Information about dates and efforts can also be added to
the CR, the information from the CRs/FRs can be used to prepare a summary, which can be
used by the project manager and the CCB to track all the changes.
Authentication
The reviews and audits that verify the physical existence of CIs and checks that they are
correctly recorded and parts list. Configuration authentication (CA) is a process of assuring
that a new baseline has all the planned and approved changes incorporated. The process
involves verifying that all the functional aspects of the software is completed and also the
completeness of the delivery in terms of the right programs, documentation and data are
being delivered. The configuration authentication is an audit performed on the delivery
before it is opened to the entire world. Free software tools that help in SCM are:
• Concurrent Versions System (CVS)
• Revision Control System (RCS)
• Source Code Control System (SCCS)
4.
A contract is an agreement between two parties that creates an obligation to perform (or not
perform) a particular duty. A legally enforceable contract requires.
• Where equipment is being supplied then, in English law, this may be regarded as a
contract for the supply of goods.
• In the case of the supply of software this may be regarded as supplying service or the
granting of a license to use the software, which remains in the ownership of the
supplier.
IS2207 approach to the acquisition and supply of software. Major process relating to software:
• Acquisition: It is the set of procedures that a customer for software should follow in
order to obtain that software from an external source.
• Supply: It is the set of procedures that the supplier should adopt in order to satisfy the
acquirers needs.
• Operation
• Maintenance
• Development
Stages in contract Management:
1. Requirement analysis
• External consultant can draw up a requirements document.
• Check requirements reflects their needs.
• Functional requirements, quality requirements
2. Evaluation plan
• Check mandatory requirement
• Consider desirable requirement
• Calculate the cost for the whole life time of the proposed system
• Increase in quality-increase in cost
3. Invitation to tender
• It contains the requirement document with supporting letter which specifies
how to prepare the response
• Deadline specified
• Evaluation of proposal
• Scrutiny of the proposal document
• Interviewing supplier’s representatives
• Demonstration
• Site visit
• Practical test
Typical terms in contract management
• Form of agreement
• Goods and services to be supplied
• Environment
• Customer commitment
• Standards
• Timetable
• Price and payment methods